<title>Release Checklist</title>

This file describes the testing procedures for Fossil prior to an
official release.

<ol>
<li><p>
From a private directory (not the source tree) run
"<b>tclsh $SRC/test/tester.tcl $FOSSIL</b>" where $FOSSIL is the
name of the executable under test and $SRC is the source tree.
Verify that there are no errors.

<li><p>
Click on each of the links in in the
[./graph-test-1.wiki] document and verify that all graphs are
rendered correctly.

<li><p>
Click on each of the links in in the
[./diff-test-1.wiki] document and verify that all diffs are
rendered correctly.

<li><p>
Click on the following link to verify that it works: [./test-page%2b%2b.wiki | ./test-page++.wiki]
(NB:  Many web servers automatically block
or rewrite URLs that contain "+" characters, even when those "+"
characters are encoded as "%2B".  On such web servers, the URL
above will not work.  This test is only guaranteed to work
when running "fossil ui".)

<li><p>
Shift-click on each of the links in [./fileage-test-1.wiki] and verify
correct operation of the file-age computation.

<li><p>
Verify correct name-change tracking behavior (no net changes) for:
<blockquote><b>
fossil test-name-changes --debug  b120bc8b262ac 374920b20944b
</b></blockquote>

<li><p>
Compile for all of the following platforms:
<ol type="a">
<li> Linux x86
<li> Linux x86_64
<li> Mac x86
<li> Mac x86_64
<li> Windows (mingw)
<li> Windows (vc++)
<li> OpenBSD
</ol>

<li><p>
Run at least one occurrence of the following commands on every
platform:
<ol type="a">
<li> <b>fossil rebuild</b>
<li> <b>fossil sync</b>
<li> <b>fossil test-integrity</b>
</ol>

<li><p>
Run the following commands on Linux and verify no major memory leaks
and no run-time errors or warnings (except for the well-known jump on an
uninitialized value that occurs within zlib).
<ol type="a">
<li> <b>valgrind fossil rebuild</b>
<li> <b>valgrind fossil sync</b>
</ol>

<li><p>

Inspect [http://www.fossil-scm.org/index.html/vdiff?from=release&to=trunk&sbs=1|all code changes since the previous release], paying particular
attention to the following details:
<ol type="a">
<li> Can a malicious HTTP request cause a buffer overrun.
<li> Can a malicious HTTP request expose privileged information to
     unauthorized users.
</ol>


<li><p>
Use the release candidate version of fossil in production on the
[http://www.fossil-scm.org/] website for at least 48 hours (without
incident) prior to making the release official.

<li><p>
Verify that the [../www/changes.wiki | Change Log] is correct and
up-to-date.
</ol>

<hr>

Upon successful completion of all tests above, tag the release candidate
with the "release" tag and set its background color to "#d0c0ff".  Update
the www/changes.wiki file to show the date of the release.
