<title>The Annotate Algorithm</title>

<h2>1.0 Introduction</h2>

The [/help?cmd=annotate|fossil annotate],
[/help?cmd=blame|fossil blame], and
[/help?cmd=praise|fossil praise] commands, and the
[/help?cmd=/annotate|/annotate],
[/help?cmd=/blame|/blame], and
[/help?cmd=/praise|/praise] web pages are all used to show the most
recent check-in that modified each line of a particular file.
This article overviews the algorithm used to compute the annotation
for a file in Fossil.

<h2>2.0 Algorithm</h2>

<ol type='1'>
<li>Locate the check-in that contains the file that is to be
    annotated.  Call this check-in C0.
<li>Find all direct ancestors of C0.  A direct ancestor is the closure
    of the primary parent of C0.  Merged in branches are not part of
    the direct ancestors of C0.
<li>Prune the list of ancestors of C0 so that it contains only
    check-in in which the file to be annotated was modified.
<li>Load the complete text of the file to be annotated from check-in C0.
    Call this version of the file F0.
<li>Parse F0 into lines.  Mark each line as "unchanged".
<li>For each ancestor of C0 on the pruned list (call the ancestor CX),
    beginning with the most
    recent ancestor and moving toward the oldest ancestor, do the
    following steps:
<ol type='a'>
<li>Load the text for the file to be annotated as it existed in check-in CX.
    Call this text FX.
<li>Compute a diff going from FX to F0.
<li>For each line of F0 that is changed in the diff and which was previously
    marked "unchanged", update the mark to indicated that line
    was modified by CX.
</ol>
<li>Show each line of F0 together with its change mark, appropriately
    formatted.
</ol>

<h2>3.0 Discussion and Notes</h2>

The time-consuming part of this algorithm is step 6b - computing the
diff from all historical versions of the file to the version of the file
under analysis.  For a large file that has many historical changes, this
can take several seconds.  For this reason, the default
[/help?cmd=/annotate|/annotate] webpage only shows those lines that where
changed by the 20 most recent modifications to the file.  This allows
the loop on step 6 to terminate after only 19 diffs instead of the hundreds
or thousands of diffs that might be required for a frequently modified file.

As currently implemented (as of 2015-12-12) the annotate algorithm does not
follow files across name changes.  File name change information is
available in the database, and so the algorithm could be enhanced to follow
files across name changes by modifications to step 3.

Step 2 is interesting in that it is
[/artifact/6cb824a0417?ln=196-201 | implemented] using a
[https://www.sqlite.org/lang_with.html#recursivecte|recursive common table expression].
