<title>CGI Script Configuration Options</title>

<h1>Summary</h1>

It is not necessary to have a central server in order to use Fossil.
But a central server can help a project run more smoothly by giving developers
a common point of rendezvous for syncing, and by providing a web-based
portal where developers and non-developers alike can learn about the
project and its current state.

Setting up a server using Fossil is easy.
A [./server/|separate document] talks about all of the many different methods for
setting up a Fossil server, one of which is [./server/any/cgi.md | as a CGI
script].  CGI is the technique that the three
[./selfhost.wiki|self-hosting Fossil repositories] all use.

Setting up a Fossil server using CGI is mostly about writing a short
script (usually just 2 lines) in the cgi-bin folder of an ordinary
web-server.  But there are a lot of extra options that can be added
to this script, to customize the configuration.  This article describes
those options.

<h1>CGI Script Options</h1>

The CGI script used to launch a Fossil server will usually look something
like this:

<verbatim>
#!/usr/bin/fossil
repository: /home/www/fossils/myproject.fossil
</verbatim>

Of course, pathnames will likely be different.  The first line 
(the "[wikipedia:/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)|shebang]")
always gives the name of the Fossil executable.  Subsequent lines are of
the form "<b>property:&nbsp;argument&nbsp;...</b>".
The remainder of this document describes the available properties and
their arguments.

<hr>

<h2 id="repository">repository: <i>PATH</i></h2>

This property defines the Fossil repository that the server will use.
Every Fossil CGI requires either this property or the
[#directory|<b>directory:</b>] property (but not both).
Many Fossil CGI scripts have this one property and no other.


<h2 id="directory">directory: <i>PATH</i></h2>

The PATH is the name of a directory that contains one or more Fossil
repository files having the suffix ".fossil".  If this property is
used instead of [#repository|<b>repository:</b>], then the Fossil
server is able to serve all of the repositories in the directory.  The
specific repository used is selected by a prefix on the PATH_INFO. See
the notes for the [#repolist|<b>repolist</b>] option regarding name
collisions between subdirectories and repository files.


<h2 id="notfound">notfound: <i>URL</i></h2>

If the [#directory|<b>directory:</b>] option is used and if the PATH_INFO
of the HTTP request does not correspond to any Fossil repository, then
the request redirects to URL.


<h2 id="repolist">repolist</h2>

This is a Boolean property.
If it is present, and if the [#directory:|<b>directory:</b>] option is used,
and if the PATH_INFO string is empty, then Fossil will show a list
of available Fossil repositories.

The "skin" of the reply is determined by the first
repository in the list that has a non-zero
[/help?cmd=repolist-skin|repolist-skin] setting.

If no repository has such a non-zero repolist-skin setting, then
the repository list is generic HTML without any decoration, with
the page title taken from the <tt>FOSSIL_REPOLIST_TITLE</tt>
environment variable. The variable can be defined in the CGI
control file using the [#setenv|<tt>setenv:</tt>] statement.

The "Project Description" and "Login-Group" columns on the repolist page
are optional.  They are hidden by default.  Show them by
etting the <tt>FOSSIL_REPOLIST_SHOW</tt> environment variable to
a string that contains substrings "description" and/or "login-group".

The repolist-generated page recurses into subdirectories and will list
all <tt>*.fossil</tt> files found, with the following exceptions:

   *  Filenames starting with a period are treated as "hidden" and skipped.

   *  Subdirectory names which match the base name of a fossil file in
      the same directory are listed in the resulting page but are not
      hyperlinked because the links would be ambiguous and the
      repositories in the subdirectories would be unreachable to
      clients. For example, any repositories under subdirectory
      <tt>XYZ</tt> are unreachable if <tt>XYZ.fossil</tt> exists in
      the same directory as <tt>XYZ</tt>, noting that this particular
      name check is case-insensitive. The entries for such
      repositories are clearly marked in the repolist page's output to
      make the user aware of the problem. To make them accessible,
      move them into a directory which does not share a base name with
      a repository file.


<h2 id="localauth">localauth</h2>

This is a Boolean property.
If it is present, [./caps/ref.html#s | setup capability]
is granted to any HTTP request that
comes in over a loopback interface, such as 127.0.0.1.


<h2 id="skin">skin: <i>NAME</i></h2>

If NAME is the name of one of the built-in skins supported by Fossil,
then this option causes Fossil to display using that built-in skin,
and to ignore any custom skin that might be configured in the repository
itself.

So, if you wanted to set up a server for a single Fossil project, but
also give users the option to use several of the different built-in
skins, you could create multiple CGI scripts, each with a different
"<b>skin:</b>" property, but all pointing to the same <b>repository:</b>.
Then users can select which skin to use by using the appropriate CGI.


<h2 id="files">files: </i>GLOBLIST</i></h2>

The GLOBLIST argument is a comma-separate list of "globs" that specify
filenames.  In [#directory|<b>directory:</b> mode], if the PATH_INFO
does not identify any Fossil repository, but it does refer some other
file in the directory, and that filename matches one of the glob patterns
in the GLOBLIST, then the file is returned as static content.


<h2 id="setenv">setenv: <i>NAME VALUE</i></h2>

This parameter causes additional environment variable NAME to have VALUE.
This parameter can be repeated as many times as necessary.


<h2 id="HOME">HOME: <i>PATH</i></h2>

This parameter is a short-hand for "<b>setenv HOME <i>PATH</i></b>".


<h2 id="cgi-debug">cgi-debug: <i>FILE</i></h2>

Cause CGI-related debugging information to be appended in <i>FILE</i>.  Use
this to help debug CGI problems.


<h2 id="errorlog">errorlog: <i>FILENAME</i></h2>

This setting causes the server to log any errors in FILENAME.
It is ok for multiple Fossil CGIs to share the same error log.

Setting up an error log for Fossil servers is not required, but it
is recommended.


<h2 id="timeout">timeout: <i>N</i></h2>

This property changes the timeout on each CGI request to N seconds.
If N is zero, then there is no timeout.  If this property is omitted,
then the default timeout is 300 seconds (5 minutes).


<h2 id="extroot">extroot: <i>PATH</i></h2>

This property defines the DOCUMENT_ROOT for the
[./serverext.wiki|CGI Server Extensions].  If this property
is present, then CGI Server Extensions are enabled.  When this
property is omitted, CGI Server Extensions are disabled.

A cascade of CGI invocations can occur here.  Fossil itself is
started as CGI, then Fossil can turn around and invoke a sub-CGI
extension.  The sub-CGI extension outputs reply text, when Fossil
then (optionally) augments with its own header and footer and returns
to the original requestor.  The property controls the DOCUMENT_ROOT
of the sub-CGI.


<h2 id="redirect">redirect: <i>REPO URL</i></h2>

Extract the "name" query parameter and search REPO for a check-in or
ticket that matches the value of "name", then redirect to URL.  There
can be multiple "redirect:" lines that are processed in order.  If the
repo name is "*", then an unconditional redirect to URL is taken.


<h2 id="jsmode">jsmode: <i>VALUE</i></h2>

Specifies the delivery mode for JavaScript files. See "[/help?cmd=http |
http --jsmode]" for the allowed values and their meanings.


<h2 id="mainmenu">mainmenu: <i>FILE</i></h2>

This parameter causes the contents of the given file to override the
site's <tt>mainmenu</tt> configuration setting, in much the same way
that the <tt>skin</tt> setting overrides the skin. This can be used to
apply a common main menu to a number of sites, and centrally maintain
it, without having to copy its contents into each site. Note, however,
that the contents of this setting are not stored in the repository and
will not be cloned along with the repository.
