<title>Change Log</title>

<a name='v2_4'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 2.4 (2017-11-03)</h2>

  *  New feature: URL Aliases.  URL Aliases allow an administrator
     to define their own URLs on the web interface that are rewritten to
     built-in URLs with specific parameters.  Create and configure URL Aliases
     using the /Setup/URL_Aliases menu option in the web interface.
  *  Add tech-note search capability.
  *  Add the -r|--revision and -o|--origin options to the
     [/help?cmd=annotate|annotate] command.
  *  Add the origin= query parameter to the [/help?cmd=/annotate|/annotate]
     webpage.
  *  The [/help?cmd=annotate|fossil annotate] command and the
     [/help?cmd=/annotate|/annotate] web page go backwards in time as far
     as can be computed in 30 milliseconds by default, rather than stopping
     after 20 steps.  The new limit= query parameter or the --limit command-line
     option can be used to alter this timeout.
  *  Provide separate [/help#settings|on-line help screens for each setting].
  *  Back out support for the --no-dir-symlinks option
  *  Remove support from the legacy configuration sync protocol.  The only
     way now to do a configuration push or pull is to use the new protocol that
     was added in 2011.
  *  Add the from= and to= query parameters to [/help?cmd=/fdiff|/fdiff]
     in order to get a diff of two files in the same check-in.
  *  Fix the "ssh://" protocol to prevent an attack whereby the attacker convinces
     a victim to run a "clone" with a dodgy URL and thereby gains access to their
     system.
  *  Provide a checkbox that will temporarily disable all ad-units.
  *  Improvements to the [/help?cmd=/stat|/stat] page
  *  Various new hyperlinks to the [/help?cmd=/bloblist|/bloblist]
     and [/help?cmd=/bigbloblist|/bigbloblist] pages.
  *  Correct the [/help?cmd=/doc|/doc] page to support read-only repositories.
  *  Correct [/help?cmd=/zip|/zip], [/help?cmd=/tarball|/tarball],
     [/help?cmd=zip|zip], and [/help?cmd=tarball|tarball] pages and commands to
     honor the versioned manifest setting when outside of an open checkout
     directory.
  *  The admin-log and access-log settings are now on by default for
     new repositories.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.21.0.

<a name='v2_3'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 2.3 (2017-07-21)</h2>

  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.20.0 (beta).
  *  Update internal Unicode character tables, used in regular expression
     handling, from version 9.0 to 10.0.
  *  Show the last-sync-URL on the [/help?cmd=/urllist|/urllist] page.
  *  Added the "Event Summary" activity report.
     [/reports?type=ci&view=lastchng|example]
  *  Added the "Security Audit" page, available to administrators only
  *  Added the Last Login time to the user list page, for administrators only
  *  Added the --numstat option to the [/help?cmd=diff|fossil diff] command
  *  Limit the size of the heap and stack on unix systems, as a proactive
     defense against the
     [https://www.qualys.com/2017/06/19/stack-clash/stack-clash.txt|Stack Clash]
     attack.
  *  Fix "database locked" warnings caused by "PRAGMA optimize".
  *  Fix a potential XSS vulnerability on the
     [/help?cmd=/help|/help] webpage.
  *  Documentation updates

<a name='v2_2'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 2.2 (2017-04-11)</h2>

  *  GIT comment tags are now handled by Fossil during import/export.
  *  Show the content of README files on directory listings.
     ([/file/skins|example])
  *  Support for Basic Authentication if enabled (default off).
  *  Show the hash algorithms used on the
     [/help?cmd=/rcvfromlist|/rcvfromlist] page.
  *  The [/help?cmd=/tarball|/tarball] and [/help?cmd=/zip|/zip] pages
     now use the the r= query parameter
     to select which check-in to deliver.  The uuid= query parameter
     is still accepted for backwards compatibility.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.18.0.
  *  Run "[https://www.sqlite.org/pragma.html#pragma_optimize|PRAGMA optimize]"
     on the database connection as it is closing.

<a name='v2_1'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 2.1 (2017-03-10)</h2>

  *  Add support for [./hashpolicy.wiki|hash policies] that control which
     of the Hardened-SHA1 or SHA3-256 algorithms is used to name new
     artifacts.
  *  Add the "gshow" and "gcat" subcommands to [/help?cmd=stash|fossil stash].
  *  Add the [/help?cmd=/juvlist|/juvlist] web page and use it to construct
     the [/uv/download.html|Download Page] of the Fossil self-hosting website
     using Ajax.

<a name='v2_0'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 2.0 (2017-03-03)</h2>

  *  Use the
     [https://github.com/cr-marcstevens/sha1collisiondetection|hardened SHA1]
     implemenation by Marc Stevens and Dan Shumow.
  *  Add the ability to read and understand
     [./fileformat.wiki#names|artifact names] that are based on SHA3-256
     rather than SHA1, but do not actually generate any such names.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=sha3sum|sha3sum] command.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.17.0.

<a name='v1_37'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.37 (2017-01-16)</h2>

  *  Add checkbox widgets to various web pages.  See [/technote/8d18bf27e9|
     this technote] for more information.  To get the checkboxes to look as
     intended, you must update the CSS in your repository and all clones.
  *  Add the [/help/all|fossil all ui] command
  *  Add the [/help?cmd=/file|/file] webpage
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=/brlist|/brlist] webpage to make use of branch colors.
  *  Add support for the ms=EXACT|LIKE|GLOB|REGEXP query parameter on the
     [/help?cmd=/timeline|/timeline] webpage, with associated form widgets.
  *  Enhance the [/help/changes|changes] and [/help/status|status] commands
     with many new filter options so that specific kinds of changes can be
     found without having to pipe through grep or sed.
  *  Enhanced the [/help/sqlite3|fossil sql] command so that it opens the
     [./tech_overview.wiki#localdb|checkout database] and the
     [./tech_overview.wiki#configdb|configuration database] in addition to the
     respository database.
  *  TH1 enhancements:
     <ul><li>Add <nowiki>[unversioned content]</nowiki> command.</li>
     <li>Add <nowiki>[unversioned list]</nowiki> command.</li>
     <li>Add project_description variable.</li>
     </ul>
  *  Rename crnl-glob [/help/settings|setting] to crlf-glob, but keep
     crnl-glob as a compatibility alias.
  *  Added the --command option to the [/help/diff|diff] command.
  *  Fix a C99-ism that prevents the 1.36 release from building with MSVC.
  *  Fix [/help?cmd=ticket|ticket set] when using the "+" prefix with fields
     from the "ticketchng" table.
  *  Remove the "fusefs" command from builds that do not have the underlying
     support enabled.
  *  Fixes for incremental git import/export.
  *  Minor security enhancements to
     [./encryptedrepos.wiki|encrypted repositories].
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.16.2.
  *  Update the built-in Zlib to version 1.2.11.


<a name='v1_36'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.36 (2016-10-24)</h2>

  *  Add support for [./unvers.wiki|unversioned content],
     the [/help?cmd=unversioned|fossil unversioned] command and the
     [/help?cmd=/uv|/uv] and [/uvlist] web pages.
  *  The [/uv/download.html|download page] is moved into
     [./unvers.wiki|unversioned content] so that the self-hosting Fossil
     websites no longer uses any external content.
  *  Added the "Search" button to the graphical diff generated by
     the --tk option on the [/help?cmd=diff|diff] command.
  *  Added the "--checkin VERSION" option to the
     [/help?cmd=diff|diff] command.
  *  Various performance enhancements to the [/help?cmd=diff|diff] command.
  *  Update internal Unicode character tables, used in regular expression
     handling, from version 8.0 to 9.0.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.15. Fossil now requires
     the SQLITE_DBCONFIG_MAINDBNAME interface of SQLite which is only available
     in SQLite version 3.15 and later and so Fossil will not work with
     earlier SQLite versions.
  *  Fix [https://www.mail-archive.com/fossil-users@lists.fossil-scm.org/msg23618.html|multi-line timeline bug]
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=purge|fossil purge] command.
  *  New command [/help?cmd=shell|fossil shell].
  *  SQL parameters whose names are all lower-case in Ticket Report SQL
     queries are filled in using HTTP query parameter values.
  *  Added support for [./childprojects.wiki|child projects] that are
     able to pull from their parent but not push.
  *  Added the -nocomplain option to the TH1 "query" command.
  *  Added support for the chng=GLOBLIST query parameter on the
     [/help?cmd=/timeline|/timeline] webpage.

<a name='v1_35'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.35 (2016-06-14)</h2>

  *  Enable symlinks by default on all non-Windows platforms.
  *  Enhance the [/md_rules|Markdown formatting] so that hyperlinks that begin
     with "/" are relative to the root of the Fossil repository.
  *  Rework the [/help?cmd=/setup_ulist|/setup_list page] (the User List page)
     to display all users in a click-to-sort table.
  *  Fix backslash-octal escape on filenames while importing from git
  *  When markdown documents begin with &lt;h1&gt; HTML elements, use that
     header at the document title.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=/bigbloblist|/bigbloblist page].
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=/finfo|/finfo page] so that when it is showing
     the ancestors of a particular file version, it only shows direct
     ancestors and omits changes on branches, thus making it show the same set
     of ancestors that are used for [/help?cmd=/blame|/blame].
  *  Added the --page option to the [/help?cmd=ui|fossil ui] command
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=bisect|fossil bisect ui] command
  *  Enhanced the [/help?cmd=diff|fossil diff] command so that it accepts
     directory names as arguments and computes diffs on all files contained
     within those directories.
  *  Fix the [/help?cmd=add|fossil add] command so that it shows "SKIP" for
     files added that were already under management.
  *  TH1 enhancements:
     <ul><li>Add <nowiki>[array exists]</nowiki> command.</li>
     <li>Add minimal <nowiki>[array names]</nowiki> command.</li>
     <li>Add tcl_platform(engine) and tcl_platform(platform) array
     elements.</li>
     </ul>
  *  Get autosetup working with MinGW.
  *  Fix autosetup detection of zlib in the source tree.
  *  Added autosetup detection of OpenSSL when it may be present under the
     "compat" subdirectory of the source tree.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=reparent|fossil reparent] command
  *  Added --include and --exclude options to [/help?cmd=tarball|fossil tarball]
     and [/help?cmd=zip|fossil zip] and the in= and ex= query parameters to the
     [/help?cmd=/tarball|/tarball] and [/help?cmd=/zip|/zip] web pages.
  *  Add support for [./encryptedrepos.wiki|encrypted Fossil repositories].
  *  If the FOSSIL_PWREADER environment variable is set, then use the program it
     names in place of getpass() to read passwords and passphrases
  *  Option --baseurl now works on Windows.
  *  Numerious documentation improvements.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.13.0.

<a name='v1_34'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.34 (2015-11-02)</h2>

  *  Make the [/help?cmd=clean|fossil clean] command undoable for files less
     than 10MiB.
  *  Update internal Unicode character tables, used in regular expression
     handling, from version 7.0 to 8.0.
  *  Add the new [/help?cmd=amend|amend] command which is used to modify
     tags of a "check-in".
  *  Fix bug in [/help?cmd=import|import] command, handling version 3 of
     the svndump format for subversion.
  *  Add the [/help?cmd=all|all cache] command.
  *  TH1 enhancements:
     <ul><li>Add minimal <nowiki>[lsearch]</nowiki> command. Only exact
     case-sensitive matching is supported.</li>
     <li>Add the <nowiki>[glob_match]</nowiki>, <nowiki>[markdown]</nowiki>,
     <nowiki>[dir]</nowiki>, and <nowiki>[encode64]</nowiki> commands.</li>
     <li>Add the <nowiki>[tclIsSafe] and [tclMakeSafe]</nowiki> commands to
     the Tcl integration subsystem.</li>
     <li>Add 'double', 'integer', and 'list' classes to the
     <nowiki>[string is]</nowiki> command.</li>
     </ul>
  *  Add the --undo option to the [/help?cmd=diff|diff] command.
  *  Build-in Antirez's "linenoise" command-line editing library for use with
     the [/help?cmd=sqlite3|fossil sql] command on Unix platforms.
  *  Add [/help?cmd=stash|stash cat] as an alias for the
     [/help?cmd=stash|stash show] command.
  *  Automatically pull before [/help?cmd=merge|fossil merge] when auto-sync
     is enabled.
  *  Fix --hard option to [/help?cmd=mv|fossil mv] and [/help?cmd=rm|fossil rm]
     to enable them to work properly with certain relative paths.
  *  Change the mimetype for ".n" and ".man" files to text/plain.
  *  Display improvements in the [/help?cmd=bisect|fossil bisect chart] command.
  *  Updated the built-in SQLite to version 3.9.1 and activated JSON1 and FTS5
     support (both currently unused within Fossil).

<a name='v1_33'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.33 (2015-05-23)</h2>
  *  Improved fork detection on [/help?cmd=update|fossil update],
     [/help?cmd=status|fossil status] and related commands.
  *  Change the default skin to what used to be called "San Francisco Modern".
  *  Add the [/repo-tabsize] web page
  *  Add [/help?cmd=import|fossil import --svn], for importing a subversion
     repository into fossil which was exported using "svnadmin dump".
  *  Add the "--compress-only" option to [/help?cmd=rebuild|fossil rebuild].
  *  Use a pie chart on the [/reports?view=byuser] page.
  *  Enhanced [/help?cmd=clean|fossil clean --verily] so that it ignores
     keep-glob and ignore-glob settings.  Added the -x alias for --verily.
  *  Add the --soft and --hard options to [/help?cmd=rm|fossil rm] and
     [/help?cmd=mv|fossil mv].  The default is still --soft, but that is
     now configurable at compile-time or by the mv-rm-files setting.
  *  Improved ability to [./customgraph.md|customize the timeline graph].
  *  Improvements to the [/sitemap] page.
  *  Automatically adjust the [/help?cmd=timeline|CLI timeline] to the terminal
     width on Linux.
  *  Added <nowiki>[info commands] and [info vars]</nowiki> commands to TH1.
     These commands perform the same function as their Tcl counterparts,
     except they do not accept a pattern argument.
  *  Fix some obscure issues with TH1 expression processing.
  *  Fix titles in search results for documents that are not wiki, markdown,
     or HTML.
  *  Formally translate TH1 to Tcl return codes and vice-versa, where
     necessary, in the Tcl integration subsystem.
  *  Add [/help?cmd=leaves|fossil leaves -multiple], for finding multiple
     leaves on the same branch.
  *  Added the "Blitz" skin option.
  *  Removed the ".fossil-settings/keep-glob" file.  It should not have been
     checked into the repository.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.8.10.2.
  *  Make [/help?cmd=open|fossil open] honor ".fossil-settings/allow-symlinks".
  *  Allow [/help?cmd=add|fossil add] to be used on symlinks to nonexistent or
     unreadable files in the same way as [/help?cmd=addremove|fossil addremove].
  *  Added fork warning to be issued if sync produced a fork
  *  Update the [/help?cmd=/info|info] page to report when a file becomes a
     symlink.  Additionally show the UUID for files whose types have changed
     without changing contents or symlink target.
  *  Have [/help?cmd=changes|fossil changes] and
     [/help?cmd=status|fossil status] report when executable or symlink status
     changes on otherwise unmodified files.
  *  Permit filtering weekday and file [/help?cmd=/reports|reports] by user.
     Also ensure the user parameter is preserved when changing types.  Add a
     field for direct entry of the user name to each applicable report.
  *  Create parent directories of [/help?cmd=settings|empty-dirs] if they don't
     already exist.
  *  Inhibit timeline links to wiki pages that have been deleted.

<a name='v1_33'></a>
<h2>Changes for Version 1.32 (2015-03-14)</h2>
  *  When creating a new repository using [/help?cmd=init|fossil init], ensure
     that the new repository is fully compatible with historical versions of
     Fossil by having a valid manifest as RID 1.
  *  Anti-aliased rendering of arrowheads on timeline graphs.
  *  Added vi/less-style key bindings to the --tk diff GUI.
  *  Documentation updates to fix spellings and changes all "checkins" to
     "check-ins".
  *  Add the --repolist option to server commands such as
     [/help?cmd=server|fossil server] or [/help?cmd=http|fossil http].
  *  Added the "Xekri" skin.
  *  Enhance the "ln=" query parameter on artifact displays to accept multiple
     ranges, separate by spaces (or "+" when URL-encoded).
  *  Added [/help?cmd=forget|fossil forget] as an alias for
     [/help?cmd=rm|fossil rm].

<a name='v1_31'></a>
<h2>Changes For Version 1.31 (2015-02-23)</h2>
  *  Change the auxiliary schema by adding columns MLINK.ISAUX and MLINK.PMID
     columns to the schema, to support better drawing of file change graphs.
     A [/help?cmd=rebuild|fossil rebuild] is recommended but is not required.
     so that the new graph drawing logic can work effectively.
  *  Added [/search|search] over Check-in comments, Documents, Tickets and
     Wiki.  Disabled by default.  The search can be either a full-scan or it
     can use an index that is kept up-to-date automatically.  The new
     /srchsetup web-page and the [/help?cmd=fts-config|fts-config] command
     were added to help configure the search capability.  Expect further
     enhancements to the search capabilities in subsequent releases.
  *  Added form elements to some submenus (in particular the /timeline)
     for easier operation.
  *  Added the --ifneeded option to [/help?cmd=rebuild|fossil rebuild].
  *  Added "override skins" using the "skin:" line of the CGI script or
     using the --skin LABEL option on the [/help?cmd=server|server],
     [/help?cmd=ui|ui], or [/help?cmd=http|http] commands.
  *  Embedded html documents that begin with
     &lt;doc class="fossil-doc"&gt; are displayed with standard
     headers and footers added.
  *  Allow &lt;div style='...'&gt; markup in [/wiki_rules|wiki].
  *  Renamed "Events" to "Technical Notes", while updating the technote
     display and control pages.  Add support for technotes as plain text
     or as Markdown.
  *  Added the [/md_rules] pages containing summary instructions on the
     Markdown format.
  *  Added the --repolist and --nojail options to the various server commands
     (ex: [/help?cmd=server|fossil server]).
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=all|fossil all add] subcommand to "fossil all".
  *  Improvements to the /login page.  Some hyperlinks to pages that require
     "anonymous" privileges are displayed even if the current user is "nobody"
     but automatically redirect to /login.
  *  The [/help?cmd=/doc|/doc] web-page will now try to deliver the file
     "404.md" from the top-level directory (if such a file exists) in
     place of its built-in 404 text.
  *  Download of Tarballs and ZIP Archives by user "nobody" is now enabled
     by default in new repositories.
  *  Enhancements to the table sorting controls.  More display tables
     are now sortable.
  *  Add IPv6 support to [/help?cmd=sync|fossil sync] and
     [/help?cmd=clone|fossil clone]
  *  Add more skins such as "San Francisco Modern" and "Eagle".
  *  During shutdown, check to see if the check-out database (".fslckout")
     contains a lot of free space, and if it does, VACUUM it.
  *  Added the [/mimetype_list] page.
  *  Added the [/hash-collisions] page.
  *  Allow the user of Common Table Expressions in the SQL that defaults
     ticket reports.
  *  Break out the components (css, footer, and header) for the
     various built-in skins into separate files in the source tree.

<a name='v1_30'></a>
<h2>Changes For Version 1.30 (2015-01-19)</h2>
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=bundle|fossil bundle] command.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=purge|fossil purge] command.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=publish|fossil publish] command.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=unpublished|fossil unpublished] command.
  *  Enhance the [/tree] webpage to show the age of each file with the option
     to sort by age.
  *  Enhance the [/brlist] webpage to show additional information about each branch
     and to be sortable by clicking on column headers.
  *  Add support for Docker. Just install docker and type
     "sudo docker run -d -p 8080:8080 nijtmans/fossil" to get it running.
  *  Add the [/help/fusefs|fossil fusefs DIRECTORY] command that mounts a
     Fuse Filesystem at the given DIRECTORY and populates it with read-only
     copies of all historical check-ins. This only works on systems that
     support FuseFS.
  *  Add the administrative log that records all configuration.
  *  Added the [/sitemap] webpage.
  *  Added the [/bloblist] web page.
  *  Let [/help?cmd=new|fossil new] no longer create an initial empty commit
     by default. The first commit after checking out an empty repository will
     become the initial commit.
  *  Added the [/help?cmd=all|fossil all dbstat] and
     [/help?cmd=all|fossil all info] commands.
  *  Update SQLite to version 3.8.8.
  *  Added the --verily option to the [/help?cmd=clean|fossil clean] command.
  *  Add the "autosync-tries" setting to control the number of autosync attempts
     before returning an error.
  *  Added a compile-time option (--with-miniz) to build using miniz instead
     of zlib.  Disabled by default.
  *  Support customization of commands and webpages, including the ability to
     add new ones, via the "TH1 hooks" feature.  Disabled by default. Enabled
     via a compile-time option.
  *  Add the <nowiki>[checkout], [render], [styleHeader], [styleFooter],
     [trace], [getParameter], [setParameter], [artifact], and
     [globalState]</nowiki> commands to TH1, primarily for use by TH1 hooks.
  *  Automatically adjust the width of command-line timeline output according to the
     detected width of the terminal.
  *  Prompt the user to optionally fix invalid UTF-8 at check-in.
  *  Added a line-number toggle option to the [/help?cmd=/info|/info]
     and [/help?cmd=/artifact|/artifact] pages.
  *  Most commands now issue errors rather than silently ignoring unrecognized
     command-line options.
  *  Use full 40-character SHA1 hashes (instead of abbreviations) in most
     internal URLs.
  *  The "ssh:" sync method on Windows now uses "plink.exe" instead of "ssh" as
     the secure-shell client program.
  *  Prevent a partial clone when the connection is lost.
  *  Make the distinction between 301 and 302 redirects.
  *  Allow commits against a closed check-in as long as the commit goes onto
     a different branch.
  *  Improved cache control in the web interface reduces unnecessary requests
     for common resources like the page logo and CSS.
  *  Fix a rare and long-standing sync protocol bug
     that would silently prevent the sync from running to completion.  Before
     this bug-fix it was sometimes necessary to do "fossil sync --verily" to
     get two repositories in sync.
  *  Add the [/finfo?name=src/foci.c|files_of_checkin] virtual table - useful
     for ad hoc queries in the [/help?cmd=sqlite3|fossil sql] interface,
     and also used internally.
  *  Added the "$secureurl" TH1 variable for use in headers and footers.
  *  (Internal:) Add the ability to include resources as separate files in the
     source tree that are converted into constant byte arrays in the compiled
     binary.  Use this feature to store the Tk script that implements the --tk
     diff option in a separate file for easier editing.
  *  (Internal:) Implement a system of compile-time checks to help ensure
     the correctness of printf-style formatting strings.
  *  Fix CVE-2014-3566, also known as the POODLE SSL 3.0 vulnerability.
  *  Numerous documentation fixes and improvements.
  *  Other obscure and minor bug fixes - see the timeline for details.

<a name='v1_29'></a>
<h2>Changes For Version 1.29 (2014-06-12)</h2>
  *  Add the ability to display content, diffs and annotations for UTF16
     text files in the web interface.
  *  Add the "SaveAs..." and "Invert" buttons
     to the graphical diff display that results
     from using the --tk option with the [/help/diff | fossil diff] command.
  *  The [/reports] page now requires Read ("o") permissions. The "byweek"
     report now properly propagates the selected year through the event type
     filter links.
  *  The [/help/info | info command] now shows leaf status of the checkout.
  *  Add support for tunneling https through a http proxy (Ticket [e854101c4f]).
  *  Add option --empty to the "[/help?cmd=open | fossil open]" command.
  *  Enhanced [/help?cmd=/fileage|the fileage page] to support a glob parameter.
  *  Add -w|--ignore-all-space and -Z|--ignore-trailing-space options to
     [/help?cmd=annotate|fossil annotate], [/help?cmd=blame|fossil blame],
     [/help?cmd=diff|fossil (g)diff], [/help?cmd=stash|fossil stash diff].
  *  Add --strip-trailing-cr option to [/help?cmd=diff|fossil (g)diff] and
     [/help?cmd=stash|fossil stash diff].
  *  Add button "Ignore Whitespace" to /annotate, /blame, /ci, /fdiff
     and /vdiff UI pages.
  *  Enhance [/reports?view=byweekday|/reports] with a "byweekday" view.
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=cat|fossil cat] command so that it works outside
     of a checkout when using the -R command-line option.
  *  Use full-length SHA1 hashes, not abbreviations, in most hyperlinks.
  *  Correctly render the &lt;title&gt; markup on wiki pages in the
     [/help?cmd=/artifact|/artifact] webpage.
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=whatis|fossil whatis] command to report on attachments
     and cluster artifacts.  Added the [/help?cmd=test-whatis-all] command for
     testing purposes.
  *  Add support for HTTP Basic Authentication on [/help?cmd=clone|clone] and
     [/help?cmd=sync|sync].
  *  Fix the [/help?cmd=stash|stash] so that it remembers added files and re-adds
     them when the stash is applied.
  *  Fix the server so that it avoids writing to the database (and thus avoids
     database locking issues) on a
     [/help?cmd=pull|pull] or [/help?cmd=clone|clone].
  *  Add support for [./server.wiki#loadmgmt|server load management] using both
     a cache of expensive pages (the [/help?cmd=cache|fossil cache] command)
     and by rejecting expensive page requests when the server load average is too
     high.
  *  Add the [/help?cmd=praise|fossil praise] command as an alias for
     [/help?cmd=blame|fossil blame] for subversion compatibility.
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=test-diff|fossil test-diff] command with -y or --tk
     options so that it shows both filenames above their respective columns in
     the side-by-side diff output.
  *  Issue a warning if a [/help?cmd=add|fossil add] command tries to add a file
     that matches the ignore-glob.
  *  Add option -W|--width to "[/help?cmd=stash|fossil stash ls]"
     and "[/help?cmd=leaves|fossil leaves]" commands.
  *  Enhance support for running as the root user. Now works on Haiku.
  *  Added the <tt>-empty</tt> option to [/help?cmd=new|fossil new], which
     causes it to not create an initial empty commit. The first commit after
     checking out a repo created this way will become the initial commit.
  *  Enhance sync operations by committing each round-trip to minimize number
     of retransmits when autosync fails. Include option for
     [/help?cmd=update| fossil update] and [/help?cmd=merge| fossil merge] to
     continue even if missing content.
  *  Minor portability fixes for platforms where the char type is unsigned
     by default.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.28 (2014-01-27)</h2>
  *  Enhance [/help?cmd=/reports | /reports] to support event type filtering.
  *  When cloning a repository, the user name passed via the URL (if any)
     is now used as the default local admin user's name.
  *  Enhance the SSH transport mechanism so that it runs a single instance of
     the "fossil" executable on the remote side, obviating the need for a shell
     on the remote side.  Some users may need to add the "?fossil=/path/to/fossil"
     query parameter to "ssh:" URIs if their fossil binary is not in a standard
     place.
  *  Add the "[/help?cmd=blame | fossil blame]" command that works just like
     "fossil annotate" but uses a different output format that includes the
     user who made each changes and omits line numbers.
  *  Add the "Tarball and ZIP-archive Prefix" configuration parameter under
     Admin/Configuration.
  *  Fix CGI processing so that it works on web servers that do not
     supply REQUEST_URI.
  *  Add options --dirsonly, --emptydirs, and --allckouts to the
     "[/help?cmd=clean | fossil clean]" command.
  *  Ten-fold performance improvement in large "fossil blame" or
     "fossil annotate" commands.
  *  Add option -W|--width and --offset to "[/help?cmd=timeline | fossil timeline]"
     and  "[/help?cmd=finfo | fossil finfo]" commands.
  *  Option -n|--limit of "[/help?cmd=timeline | fossil timeline]" now
     specifies the number of entries, just like all other commands which
     have the -n|--limit option. The various timeline-related functions
     now output "--- ?? limit (??) reached ---" at the end whenever
     appropriate. Use "-n 0" if no limit is desired.
  *  Fix handling of password embedded in Fossil URL.
  *  New <tt>--once</tt> option to [/help?cmd=clone | fossil clone] command
     which does not store the URL or password when cloning.
  *  Modify [/help?cmd=ui | fossil ui] to respect "default user" in an open
     repository.
  *  Fossil now hides check-ins that have the "hidden" tag in timeline webpages.
  *  Enhance <tt>/ci_edit</tt> page to add the "hidden" tag to check-ins.
  *  Advanced possibilities for commit and ticket change notifications over
     http using TH1 scripting.
  *  Add --sha1sum and --integrate options
     to the "[/help?cmd=commit | fossil commit]" command.
  *  Add the "clean" and "extra" subcommands to the
     "[/help?cmd=all | fossil all]" command
  *  Add the --whatif option to "[/help?cmd=clean|fossil clean]" that works the
     same as "--dry-run",
     so that the name does not collide with the --dry-run option of "fossil all".
  *  Provide a configuration option to show dates on the web timeline
     as "YYMMMDD HH:MM"
  *  Add an option to the "stats" webpage that allows an administrator to see
     the current repository schema.
  *  Enhancements to the "[/help?cmd=/vdiff|/vdiff]" webpage for more difference
     display options.
  *  Added the "[/tree?ci=trunk&expand | /tree]" webpage as an alternative
     to "/dir" and make it the default way of showing file lists.
  *  Send gzipped HTTP responses to clients that support it.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.27 (2013-09-11)</h2>
  *  Enhance the [/help?cmd=changes | fossil changes],
     [/help?cmd=clean | fossil clean], [/help?cmd=extras | fossil extras],
     [/help?cmd=ls | fossil ls] and [/help?cmd=status | fossil status] commands
     to restrict operation to files and directories named on the command-line.
  *  New --integrate option to [/help?cmd=merge | fossil merge], which
     automatically closes the merged branch when committing.
  *  Renamed <tt>/stats_report</tt> page to [/reports]. Graph width is now
     relative, not absolute.
  *  Added <tt>yw=YYYY-WW</tt> (year-week) filter to timeline to limit the results
     to a specific year and calendar week number, e.g. [/timeline?yw=2013-01].
  *  Updates to SQLite to prevent opening a repository file using file descriptors
     1 or 2 on Unix.  This fixes a bug under which an assertion failure could
     overwrite part of a repository database file, corrupting it.
  *  Added support for unlimited line lengths in side-by-side diffs.
  *  New --close option to [/help?cmd=commit | fossil commit], which
     immediately closes the branch being committed.
  *  Added <tt>chart</tt> option to [/help?cmd=bisect | fossil bisect].
  *  Improvements to the "human or bot?" determination.
  *  Reports errors about missing CGI-standard environment variables for HTTP
     servers which do not support them.
  *  Minor improvements to sync support on Windows.
  *  Added <tt>--scgi</tt> option to [/help?cmd=server | fossil server].
  *  Internal improvements to the sync process.
  *  The internals of the JSON API are now MIT-licensed, so downstream
     users/packagers are no longer affected by the "do no evil" license
     clause.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.26 (2013-06-18)</h2>
  *  The argument to the --port option for the [/help?cmd=ui | fossil ui] and
     [/help?cmd=server | fossil server] commands can take an IP address in addition
     to the port number, causing Fossil to bind to just that one IP address.
  *  After prompting for a password, also ask if that password should be
     remembered.
  *  Performance improvements to the diff engine.
  *  Fix the side-by-side diff engine to work better with multi-byte Unicode text.
  *  Color-coding in the web-based annotation (blame) display.  Fix the annotation
     engine so that it is no longer confused by time-warps.
  *  The markdown formatter is now available by default and can be used for
     tickets, wiki, and embedded documentation.
  *  Add subcommands "fossil bisect log" and "fossil bisect status" to the
     [/help?cmd=bisect | fossil bisect] command, as well as other bisect enhancements.
  *  Enhanced defenses that prevent spiders from using excessive CPU and bandwidth.
  *  Consistent use of the -n or --dry-run command line options.
  *  Win32: Fossil now understands Cygwin paths containing one or more of
     the characters <nowiki>"*:<>?|</nowiki>. Those are normally forbidden in
     win32. This means that the win32 fossil.exe is better usable in a Cygwin
     environment. See
     [http://cygwin.com/cygwin-ug-net/using-specialnames.html#pathnames-specialchars].
  *  Cygwin: Fossil now understands win32 absolute paths starting with a drive
     letter everywhere. The default value of the "case-sensitive" setting is
     now FALSE, except when case-sensitivity is enabled in the Windows kernel.
     See
     [http://cygwin.com/cygwin-ug-net/using-specialnames.html#pathnames-casesensitive]
  *  Enhancements to /timeline.rss, adding more flags for filtering
     results, including the ability to subscribe to changes made
     to individual tickets. For example: [/timeline.rss?y=t&tkt=12fceeec82].
  *  Improved handling of the differences between case-sensitive and
     case-insensitive filesystems.
  *  JSON API: added the 'status' command to report local checkout status.
  *  Fixes to the <tt>--args</tt> support and documented this feature in the help.
  *  Added [/stats_report] page.
  *  Added <tt>ym=YYYY-MM</tt> filter to the [/timeline?ym=2013-06].
  *  Fixed: <tt>config reset</tt> now re-installs default ticket report format.
  *  <tt>ssh://</tt> and <tt>file://</tt> protocols now ignore proxy settings.
  *  Added [/hash-color-test] web page.
  *  Cherry-pick merges are recorded internally (though no yet displayed on the
     timeline graph.)
  *  Bring in the latest versions of SQLite, zlib, and autosetup from upstream.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.25 (2013-02-16)</h2>
  *  Enhancements to ticket processing. There are now two tables: TICKET and
     TICKETCHNG. There is one row in TICKETCHNG for each ticket artifact.
     Fields from ticket artifacts go into either or both of TICKET and
     TICKETCHNG, whichever contain matching column names. Default ticket
     edit and viewing scripts are updated to use TICKETCHNG. The TH1
     scripting language is enhanced to support this, including the new
     "query" command for doing SQL queries against the repository database.
     All changes should be backwards compatible.
  *  Add the ability to moderate ticket and wiki changes.  Unmoderated changes
     do not sync and may be deleted by the moderator if found to contain spam
     or other objectionable content.
  *  Add javascript so that clicking on a node of the timeline graph selects
     that node.  Then clicking on a second node shows a diff between the
     two nodes.  Clicking on the selected node unselects it.
  *  Warn of unresolved merge conflicts in "fossil status" and disallow
     commits of unresolved conflicts unless the --allow-conflict option
     is used.
  *  Add javascript so that clicking on column headers in a ticket report
     sorts by the indicated column.
  *  Add the "fossil cat" command which is basically an alias for
     "fossil finfo -p".
  *  Hyperlinks with the class "button" are rendered as submenu buttons
     on embedded documentation.
  *  The check-in comment editor on Windows now defaults to NotePad.exe.
  *  Correctly deal with BOMs in check-in comments.  Also attempt to convert
     check-in comments to UTF8 from other encodings.
  *  Allow the deletion of multiple stash entries using multiple arguments
     to the "fossil stash rm" command.
  *  Enhance the "fossil server DIRECTORY" command to serve static content
     files contained in DIRECTORY.  For security, only files with a
     recognized suffix (such as *.html, *.jpg, *.txt, etc) will be delivered
     as static content, and *.fossil files are not on the list of recognized
     suffixes.  There are additional restrictions on the names of the files.
  *  Allow the "fossil ui" command to specify a directory as long as the
     the --notfound option is used.
  *  Add a configuration option that causes timeline messages to be rendered
     as text/x-fossil-plain (which is the same as text/plain except that
     hyperlinks inside of <nowiki>[...]</nowiki> are decorated.)
  *  Only decorate <nowiki>[...]</nowiki> in check-in comments and tickets
     if the contented text really is a valid hyperlink target.
  *  Improvements to the side-by-side diff algorithm, for a more
     human-friendly display in some complex cases.
  *  Added <nowiki>[utime] and [stime]</nowiki> commands to TH1.  These
     commands can be used for things such as displaying the page rendering
     time in the footer.
  *  Add the ability to pass command-line options of "fossil rebuild" to
     "fossil all rebuild".
  *  Add the --deanalyze option to "fossil rebuild" (and "fossil all rebuild")
  *  Do not run the graphical merging tool nor leave merge-droppings after a
     dry-run merge.  Display an improved merge-summary message at the end of
     the merge.
  *  Add options to "fossil commit" to override the various sanity checks.
     Options added: --allow-empty, --allow-fork, --allow-older, and
     --allow-conflict.
  *  Optionally require a CAPTCHA (controlled by a setting on the
     Admin/Access webpage) when a user who is not logged in tries to
     edit wiki, or a ticket, or an attachment.
  *  Improvements to the "ssh://" sync protocol, to help it move past
     noisy motd comments.
  *  Add the uf=FILE-SHA1-HASH query parameter to the timeline, causing the
     timeline to show only check-ins that contain the specific file identified
     by FILE-SHA1-HASH.  ("uf" stands for "uses file".)
  *  Enhance the file change annotator so that it follows the file across
     name changes.
  *  Fix the server-side of the sync protocol so that it will not generate
     a delta loop when a file changes from its original state, through two
     or more intermediate states, and back to the original state, all within
     a single sync.
  *  Show much less output during a sync operation, unless the --verbose
     option is used.
  *  Set the action= attribute of &lt;form&gt; elements using javascript,
     as an addition defense against spam-bots.
  *  Disallow invalid UTF8 characters (such as characters in the surrogate
     pair range) in filenames.
  *  Judge the UserAgent strings issued by the NetSurf webbrowser to be
     coming from a human, not from a bot.
  *  Add the zlib sources to the Fossil source tree (under compat/zlib) and
     use those sources when compiling on (Windows) systems that do not have
     a zlib library installed by default.
  *  Prompt the user with the option to convert non-UTF8 files into UTF8
     when committing.
  *  Allow the characters <nowiki>*[]?</nowiki> in filenames.
  *  Allow the --context option on diff commands to have a value of 0.
  *  Added the "dbstat" command.
  *  Enhanced "fossil merge" so that if the VERSION argument is omitted, Fossil
     tries to merge any forks of the current branch.
  *  Improved detection of forks in a commit race.
  *  Added the --analyze option to "fossil rebuild".

<h2>Changes For Version 1.24 (2012-10-22)</h2>
  *  Added support for WYSIWYG editing of wiki pages. WYSIWYG is turned off
     by default and can be turned on by setting a configuration option.
  *  Allow style= attribute to occur in HTML markup on wiki pages.
  *  Added the --tk option to the "fossi diff" and "fossil stash diff"
     commands, causing color-coded diff output to be displayed in a Tcl/Tk
     GUI window.  This option only works if Tcl/Tk is installed on the
     host.
  *  On Windows, make the "gdiff" command default to use WinDiff.exe.
  *  Update the "fossil stash" command so that it always prompts for a
     comment if the -m option is omitted.
  *  Enhance the timeline webpages so that a=, b=, c=, d=, p=, and dp=
     query parameters (and others) can all accept any valid check-in name
     (such as branch names or labels) instead of just SHA1 hashes.
  *  Added the "fossil stash show" command.
  *  Added the "fileage" webpage with links to this page from the check-in
     information page and from the file browser.
  *  Added --age and -t options to the "fossil ls" command.
  *  Added the --setmtime option to "fossil update".  When used, the mtime
     of all managed files is set to the time when the most recent version of
     the file was checked in.
  *  Changed the "vdiff" webpage to show the complete text of files that
     were added or removed (the equivalent of using the -N or --newfile
     options with the "fossil diff" command-line.)
  *  Added the --temp option to "fossil clean" and "fossil extra", causing
     those commands to only look at temporary files generated by Fossil,
     such as merge-conflict reports or aborted check-in messages.
  *  Enhance the raw page download so that it can guess the mimetype of
     attachments based on the filename.
  *  Change the behavior of the from= and to= query parameters on the
     timeline page so that by default the path between the two specified
     check-ins avoids merges.
  *  Add the --baseurl option to "fossil server" and "fossil http" commands,
     so that those commands can be used with reverse proxies.
  *  If unable to determine the command-line user, do not guess.  Instead
     issue an error message.  This helps prevent check-ins from accidentally
     occurring under the wrong username.
  *  Include branch information in the output of file change listings
     (the "finfo" webpage).
  *  Make the simplified view of file history, rather than the full view,
     the default.
  *  In the "fossil configuration" command, allow the "css" option for
     synchronizing, importing, or exporting just the CSS file.  This makes
     it easier to share CSS files across repositories by exporting from
     one and importing to another.
  *  Add the (unsupported) "fossil test-orphans" command.
  *  Add the --template option to the "fossil init" command, to facilitate
     creating new repositories based on a template repository.
  *  Add the diff-binary setting, which if enabled causes binary files to
     be passed to the "gdiff" command for it to deal with, rather than simply
     printing a "cannot diff binary files" error.
  *  Add the --unified option to the "fossil diff" command to force a unified
     diff even if the --tk option (which normally implies a side-by-side diff)
     is used.
  *  Present a choice of nearby branches and versions to diff against on the
     check-in information page.
  *  Add the --force option to the "fossil merge" command that will force the
     merge to occur even if it would be a no-op.  This is sometimes useful for
     documentation purposes.
  *  Add another built-in skin:  "Enhanced Default".  Other minor tweaks to
     the existing skins.
  *  Add the "urllist" webpage, showing a list of URLs by which a server
     instance of Fossil has been accessed.  Requires "Administrator" privileges.
     A link is on the "Setup" main page.
  *  Enable dynamic loading of the Tcl runtime for installations that want
     to use Tcl as part of their configuration.  This reduces the size of
     the Fossil binary and allows any version of Tcl 8.4 or later to be used.
  *  Merge the latest SQLite changes from upstream.
  *  Lots of minor bug fixes.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.23 (2012-08-08)</h2>
  *  The default checkout database name is now ".fslckout" instead of
     "_FOSSIL_" on Unix.  Both names continue to work.
  *  Added the "fossil all changes" command
  *  Added the --ckout option to the "fossil all list" command
  *  Added the "public-pages" glob pattern that can be configured to allow
     anonymous users to see embedded documentation on sites where source
     code should not be accessible to anonymous users.
  *  Allow multiple --tag options on the same "fossil commit" command.
  *  Change the meaning of the --bgcolor option for "fossil commit" to only
     change the color for that one commit.  The new --branchcolor option
     is available to set a persistent background color.
  *  Add the branch= query parameter to the vdiff page and the --branch option
     to the "fossil diff" command.
  *  Check-in names of the form "root:BRANCH" now refer to the origin of
     the branch.  Hence to see all changes in a branch, use
     "fossil diff --from root:BRANCH --to BRANCH".  The --branch option on
     the diff command is an alias for the same.
  *  Add the ability to configure ad-units to be displayed between the menu
     bar and the content.
  *  Add the ability to set a background image as part of server configuration.
  *  Allow partial commits of cherrypick merges.
  *  Updates against an uncommitted merge are now a warning, not a fatal error.
  *  Prompt the user to continue if a check-in comment is unedited.
  *  Fixes to case sensitivity settings with the /dir webpage.
  *  Repositories now try to remember the locations of all checkouts and
     web-access URLs and display this information with the
     "fossil info $REPO" command.
  *  Improved defense against spiders:  The src= attribute of
     &lt;a&gt; elements is set using javascript after the page loads.
  *  Enhanced formatting of the user list page.
  *  If a file named in "fossil add" is missing, that is now a warning instead
     of a fatal error.
  *  Fix side-by-side diff so that it displays correctly with
     multi-byte UTF8 characters.
  *  Performance improvements in the diff logic.
  *  Other performance tweaks and documentation updates.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.22 (2012-03-17)</h2>
  *  Greatly improved "diff" processing including the new --brief option,
     partial line matching, colorized in-line diffs, and better performance.
  *  Promote "allow-symlinks" to a versionable setting
  *  Harden the CGI processing logic against DOS attacks
  *  Add the ability to run TH1 scripts after sync requests
  *  Store the repository name in _FOSSIL_ as it is type in the "open" command,
     possibly as a relative pathname.
  *  Make ".fslckout" the alternative name for the "_FOSSIL_" file.
  *  Change the "ssh:" transfer method to allow all access regardless of
     user permission.
  *  Improvements to the timeline messages associated with tag changes.
     (Requires a "[/help/rebuild | fossil rebuild]" to take effect.)
  *  Various additions and fixes for the JSON API.
  *  Improved merge-with-rename handling.
  *  --cherrypick merges use their origin's commit message by default.
  *  Added support for multiple concurrent logins per user.
  *  Update to use SQLite version 3.7.11.
  *  Various minor bug fixes.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.21 (2011-12-13)</h2>
  *  Added side-by-side diffs in the command-line interface
  *  Automatically enable hyperlinks if the UserAgent string in the
     HTTP header suggests that the requestor is a human and not a bot.
  *  Show only commonly used commands with "fossil help".  Use
     "fossil help --all" to see the complete list now.
  *  Improvements to the "stash" command:  (1) Stash all files, not just
     those below the working directory. (2) Add the --detail option to
     "list". (3) Confirm before "drop --all". (4) Add the "help"
     subcommand.
  *  Add an Admin/Access setting to change the number of octets of the
     IP address that are saved in login cookies - allowing this setting
     to be changed to zero
  *  Promote the "test-md5sum" command to "md5sum".
  *  Added the "whatis" command.
  *  Stop showing the server-code in status outputs - it is no longer used
     for anything.
  *  Added a compile-time option (--with-tcl) to build in full Tcl scripting
     support via integration with TH1.
  *  Merged the JSON branch into trunk.  Disabled by default.  Enabled
     by a compile-time option.  Probably it will be enabled by default
     in some future release.
  *  Update to use SQLite version 3.7.9 plus the alignment fix for Sparc.
     align

<h2>Changes For Version 1.20 (2011-10-21)</h2>
  *  Added side-by-side diffs in HTML interface. [0bde74ea1e]
  *  Added support for symlinks. (Controlled by "allow-symlinks" setting,
     off by default). [e4f1c1fe95]
  *  Fixed CLI annotate to show the proper file version in case there
     are multiple equal versions in history. [e161670939]
  *  Timeline now shows tag changes (requires rebuild).[87540ed6e6]
  *  Fixed annotate to show "more relevant" versions of lines in
     some cases. [e161670939]
  *  New command: ticket history. [98a855c508]
  *  Disabled SSLv2 in HTTPS client.[ea1d369d23]
  *  Fixed constant prompting regarding previously-saved SSL
     certificates. [636804745b]
  *  Other SSL improvements.
  *  Added -R REPOFILE support to several more CLI commands. [e080560378]
  *  Generated tarballs now have constant timestamps, so they are
     always identical for any given check-in. [e080560378]
  *  A number of minor HTML-related tweaks and fixes.
  *  Added --args FILENAME global CLI argument to import arbitrary
     CLI arguments from a file (e.g. long file lists). [e080560378]
  *  Fixed significant memory leak in annotation of files with long
     histories.[9929bab702]
  *  Added warnings when a merge operation overwrites local copies
     (UNDO is available, but previously this condition normally went
     silently unnoticed). [39f979b08c]
  *  Improved performance when adding many files. [a369dc7721]
  *  Improve merges which contain many file renames. [0b93b0f958]
  *  Added protection against timing attacks. [d4a341b49d]
  *  Firefox now remembers filled fields when returning to forms. [3fac77d7b0]
  *  Added the --stats option to the rebuild command. [f25e5e53c4]
  *  RSS feed now passes validation. [ce354d0a9f]
  *  Show overridden user when entering commit comment. [ce354d0a9f]
  *  Made rebuilding from web interface silent. [ce354d0a9f]
  *  Now works on MSVC with repos >2GB. [6092935ff2]
  *  A number of code cleanups to resolve warnings from various compilers.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.7.9 beta.

<h2>Changes For Version 1.19 (2011-09-02)</h2>
  *  Added a ./configure script based on autosetup.
  *  Added the "[/help/winsrv | fossil winsrv]" command
     for creating a Fossil service on Windows systems.
  *  Added "versionable settings" where settings that affect
     the local tree can be stored in versioned files in the
     .fossil-settings directory.
  *  Background colors for branches are chosen automatically if no
     color is specified by the user.
  *  The status, changes and extras commands now show
     pathnames relative to the current working directory,
     unless overridden by command line options or the
     "relative-paths" setting.<br><b>WARNING:</b> This
     change will break scripts which rely on the current
     output when the current working directory is not the
     repository root.
  *  Added "empty-dirs" versionable setting.
  *  Added support for client-side SSL certificates with "ssl-identity"
     setting and --ssl-identity option.
  *  Added "ssl-ca-location" setting to specify trusted root
     SSL certificates.
  *  Added the --case-sensitive BOOLEAN command-line option to many commands.
     Default to true for Unix and false for Windows.
  *  Added the "Color-Test" submenu button on the branch list web page.
  *  Compatibility improvements to the git-export feature.
  *  Performance improvements on SHA1 checksums
  *  Update to the latest SQLite version 3.7.8 alpha.
  *  Fix the tarball generator to work with very log pathnames

<h2>Changes For Version 1.18 (2011-07-14)</h2>
  *  Added this Change Log
  *  Added sequential version numbering
  *  Added a optional configure script - the Makefile still works for most
     systems.
  *  Improvements to the "annotate" algorithm: only search primary
     ancestors and ignore branches.
  *  Update the "scrub" command to remove traces of login-groups and
     subrepositories.
  *  Added the --type option to the "fossil tag find" command.
  *  In contexts where only a check-in makes sense, resolve branch and
     tag names to checkins only, never events or other artifacts.
  *  Improved display of file renames on a diff.  A rebuild is required
     to take full advantage of this change.
  *  Update the built-in SQLite to version 3.7.7.
