<h2>del | rm</h2>

The <code>del</code> (alias <code>rm</code>) command takes a "file"
<em>out</em> of a project.

It does <u>not</u> delete the file from the repository, it does
<u>not</u> remove the file from the file system on disk.  It tells
<b>fossil</b> that the file is no longer a part of the project for
which <b>fossil</b> is maintaining the sources.

For example, if you have a nice, clean source tree and use the
[./cmd_extra.wiki | <code>extra</code>] command on it, you won't
get any output.  If you then <code>rm</code> some file and commit
the change, that file will be listed by the <code>extra</code>
command.

The file is still on the disk, and it is still in the repository.
<strong>But</strong> the file <em>is not part of the project</em>
anymore.  Further changes to the file will not be checked in unless
you [./cmd_add.wiki | <code>add</code>] the file again.

It can initially be confusing to see a file that's been "deleted"
still showing up in the files list in the repository, but remember
that the files list currently<a href="#vnote"><sup>*</sup></a> shows
all of the files that have ever been in the repository <em>because
<b>fossil</b> is a source control system and therefore keeps a record
of the history of a project.</em>

To get a list of the files <em>only in the current version</em> of the
project, use the [./cmd_ls.wiki | <code>ls</code>] command.

The <code>del</code> command is the logical opposite of the
[./cmd_add.wiki | <code>add</code>] command, in its single-file-add
form.

<font size="-1"><a name="vnote"><sup>*</sup></a>version 7c281b629a on 20081220</font>

See also: [./cmd_add.wiki | fossil add],
[./cmd_ls.wiki | fossil ls],
[./reference.wiki | Reference]
