<h2>extra</h2>

The <code>extra</code> command is informational, it doesn't do anything to
a checked-out project, but it tells you something about it.

Extra files are files that exist in a checked-out project, but don't belong to
the repository.

The <code>fossil extra</code> command will get you a list of these files.

This is convenient for figuring out if you've <code>
[./cmd_add.wiki | add]</code>ed every file that needs to be

in the repository before you do a commit.  It will also tell you what
will be removed if you [./cmd_clean.wiki | <code>clean</code>]
the project.

Suppose, for example, you have a "noodle.src" file as a scratch pad
for source code, and you don't want to include your latest
hare-brained ideas in the repository?  You don't <code>add</code> it
to the repository, of course—though there are ways you might add
it unintentionally.  If your project is big, and you want to find
noodle.src, and anything else that isn't under source control within
the project directories, then<code> fossil&nbsp;extra </code> will
give you a list.

If you don't think this is all that useful, then you've never had to write
a shell script that only affects project files and leaves everything
else alone.  ;)

The <code>extra</code> command is almost, but not quite entirely, the exact
opposite of the [./cmd_ls.wiki | <code>ls</code>] command.

See also: [./cmd_status.wiki | fossil status],
[./cmd_ls.wiki | fossil ls],
[./cmd_changes.wiki | fossil changes],
[./cmd_clean.wiki | fossil clean],
[./reference.wiki | Reference]
