<h2>checkout</h2>

The <code>checkout</code> command is how a project version goes from
the repository to the chosen project directory.

Without going into detail about getting/opening a repository, once you
have a repository and a place in which the repository has been
opened, you can "check out" a "version" of the files which make up the
repository at somewhen.

The term "checkout" is traditional in source management systems, but a
bit of an anachronism in a distributed system like <b>fossil</b>.
"Checking out" a version of a project means getting all of the source
artifacts out into the standard environment---currently the
shell/file-system.

Traditionally, the version is some "incrementing" code like
v1.3.2rcQuink or f451 or something.  In distributed SCM systems it's
some absolutely unique identifier, usually the result of a one-way
hash (SHA1, in fossil's case.)  The <b>fossil</b> term for these is
<em>artifact IDs</em>.

<code>fossil&nbsp;checkout&nbsp;</code> <i>id</i> will check out the
version corresponding to <i>id</i> into the source tree.

<code>checkout</code> requires you to pick a precise version to put into
the "on-disk" source tree, and leaves any edited files which are already
in the tree intact.

<code>update</code>, on the other hand, <em>merges</em> edits into the
version you choose (if you choose one; you can default the version.)

Since a version is required, and <b>fossil</b>'s artifact IDs are
fairly long, there are two good ways to refer to the version.  You can
use a unique proper prefix of the version (six or eight characters is
more than enough in most cases) <em>or</em> you can [./cmd_tag.wiki |
tag] your baselines and use the tags for checkouts, reverting,
branching (tags are the best way to branch) and so forth.  Both
methods work throughout fossil.

See also [./cmd_tag.wiki | fossil tag],
[./cmd_revert.wiki | fossil revert],
[./cmd_update.wiki | fossil update],
[./cmd_push.wiki | fossil push],
[./cmd_pull.wiki | fossil pull],
[./cmd_clone.wiki | fossil clone],
[./cmd_open.wiki | fossil open],
[./cmd_close.wiki | fossil close],
[./cmd_new.wiki | fossil new],
[./reference.wiki | Reference]