<title>Up and running in 5 minutes as a single user</title>

<p align="center"><b><i>
The following document was contributed by Gilles Ganault on 2013-01-08.
</i></b>
</p><hr>

<h1>Up and running in 5 minutes as a single user</h1>
<p>This short document explains the main basic Fossil commands for a single
user, i.e. with no additional users, with no need to synchronize with some remote
repository, and no need for branching/forking.</p>

<h2>Create a new repository</h2>
<p>fossil new c:\test.repo</p>
<p>This will create the new SQLite binary file that holds the repository, i.e.
files, tickets, wiki, etc. It can be located anywhere, although it's considered
best practice to keep it outside the work directory where you will work on files
after they've been checked out of the repository.</p>

<h2>Open the repository</h2>
<p>cd c:\temp\test.fossil</p>
<p>fossil open c:\test.repo</p>
<p>This will check out the last revision of all the files in the repository,
if any, into the current work directory. In addition, it will create a binary
file _FOSSIL_ to keep track of changes (on non-Windows systems it is called
<tt>.fslckout</tt>).</p>

<h2>Add new files</h2>
<p>fossil add .</p>
<p>To tell Fossil to add new files to the repository. The files aren't actually
added until you run &quot;commit&quot;. When using &quot;.&quot;, it tells Fossil
to add all the files in the current directory recursively, i.e. including all
the files in all the subdirectories.</p>
<p>Note: To tell Fossil to ignore some extensions:</p>
<p>fossil settings ignore-glob &quot;*.o,*.obj,*.exe&quot; --global</p>

<h2>Remove files that haven't been committed yet</h2>
<p>fossil delete myfile.c</p>
<p>This will simply remove the item from the list of files that were previously
added through &quot;fossil add&quot;.</p>

<h2>Check current status</h2>
<p>fossil changes</p>
<p>This shows the list of changes that have been done and will be committed the
next time you run &quot;fossil commit&quot;. It's a useful command to run before
running &quot;fossil commit&quot; just to check that things are OK before proceeding.</p>

<h2>Commit changes</h2>
<p>To actually apply the pending changes to the repository, e.g. new files marked
for addition, checked-out files that have been edited and must be checked-in,
etc.</p>

<p>fossil commit -m "Added stuff"</p>

If no file names are provided on the command-line then all changes will be checked in,
otherwise just the listed file(s) will be checked in.

<h2>Compare two revisions of a file</h2>
<p>If you wish to compare the last revision of a file and its checked out version
in your work directory:</p>
<p>fossil gdiff myfile.c</p>
<p>If you wish to compare two different revisions of a file in the repository:</p>
<p>fossil finfo myfile: Note the first hash, which is the UUID of the commit
when the file was committed</p>
<p>fossil gdiff --from UUID#1 --to UUID#2 myfile.c</p>
<h2>Cancel changes and go back to previous revision</h2>
<p>fossil revert myfile.c</p>
<p>Fossil does not prompt when reverting a file. It simply reminds the user about the
"undo" command, just in case the revert was a mistake.</p>


<h2>Close the repository</h2>
<p>fossil close</p>
<p>This will simply remove the _FOSSIL_ at the root of the work directory but
will not delete the files in the work directory. From then on, any use of &quot;fossil&quot;
will trigger an error since there is no longer any connection.</p>
