<title>Hash Policy</title>

<h2>Executive Summary</h2>

<b>Or: How To Avoid Reading This Article</b>

There was much angst over the [http://www.shattered.io|SHAttered attack]
against SHA1 when it was announced in early 2017.  If you are concerned
about this and its implications for Fossil, simply
[./quickstart.wiki#install|upgrade to Fossil 2.1 or later], and the
problem will go away.  Everything will continue to work as before.

  *  Legacy repositories will continue working just as
     they always have, without any conversions or upgrades.
  *  Historical check-ins will keep their same historical
     SHA1 names.
  *  New check-ins will get more secure SHA3-256 hash names.
  *  Everything will continue as if nothing happened.
  *  Your workflow will be unchanged.

But if you are curious and want a deeper understanding of what is
going on, read on...


<h2>Introduction</h2>

The first snapshot-based distributed version control system
was [http://www.monotone.ca|Monotone].  Many of the ideas behind the design
of Fossil were copied from Monotone, including the use of a SHA1 hash to
assign names to artifacts.  Git and Mercurial did the same thing.

The SHA1 hash algorithm is used only to create names for artifacts in Fossil
(and in Git, Mercurial, and Monotone).  It is not used for security.
Nevertheless, when the [http://www.shattered.io|SHAttered attack] found
two different PDF files with the same SHA1 hash, many users learned that
"SHA1 is broken".  They see that Fossil (and Git, Mercurial, and Monotone)
use SHA1 and they therefore conclude that "Fossil is broken".  This is
not true, but it is a public relations problem.  So the decision
was made to migrate Fossil away from SHA1.

This article describes how that migration is occurring.

<h2>Use Of Hardened SHA1</h2>

In Fossil version 2.0 ([/timeline?c=version-2.0|2017-03-03]),
the internal SHA1 implementation was changed from a generic
FIPS PUB 180-4 SHA1 implementation to a "Hardened SHA1"
&#91;[https://github.com/cr-marcstevens/sha1collisiondetection|1]&#93;
&#91;[https://marc-stevens.nl/research/papers/C13-S.pdf|2]&#93;.

The Hardened SHA1 algorithm automatically detects when the artifact
being hashed is specifically designed to exploit the known weaknesses
in the SHA1 algorithm, and when it detects such an attack it changes
the hash algorithm (by increasing the number of rounds in the compression
function) to make the algorithm secure again.  If the attack detection
gets a false-positive, that means that Hardened SHA1 will get a different
answer than the standard FIPS PUB 180-4 SHA1, but the creators of
Hardened SHA1 (see the second paper
&#91;[https://marc-stevens.nl/research/papers/C13-S.pdf|2]&#93;)
report that the probability of a false-positive is vanishingly small -
less than 1 false positive out of 10<sup><font size=1>27</font></sup>
hashes.

Hardened SHA1 is slower (and a lot bigger) but Fossil does not do that
much hashing, so performance is not really an issue.

All versions of Fossil moving forward will use Hardened SHA1.  So if
someone says "SHA1 is broken, and Fossil uses SHA1, therefore Fossil is
broken," you can rebut the argument by pointing out that Fossil uses
<em>Hardened SHA1</em>, not generic SHA1, and Hardened SHA1 is <em>not</em>
broken.

<h2>Support For SHA3-256</h2>

Prior to Fossil version 2.0 ([/timeline?c=version-2.0|2017-03-03]),
all artifacts in all Fossil repositories were named
by only a SHA1 hash.
Version 2.0 extended the [./fileformat.wiki|Fossil file format]
to allow artifacts to be named by either SHA1 or SHA3-256 hashes.
(SHA3-256 is the only variant of SHA3 that
Fossil uses for artifact naming, so for the remainder of this article
it will be called simply "SHA3".  Similarly, "Hardened SHA1" will
be shortened to "SHA1" in the remaining text.)

To be clear: Fossil (version 2.0 and later)
allows the SHA1 and SHA3 hashes to be mixed within
the same repository.  Older check-ins, created years ago,
continue to be named using their legacy SHA1 hashes while
newer check-ins are named using modern SHA3 hashes.  There
is no need to "convert" a repository from SHA1 over to SHA3.
You can see this in Fossil itself.  The recent
[9d9ef82234f63758] check-in uses a SHA3 hash whereas the older
[1669115ab9d05c18] check-in uses a SHA1 hash.

Other than permitting the use of SHA3 in addition to SHA1, there
were no file format changes in Fossil version 2.0 relative
to the previous version 1.37.  Both Fossil 2.0 and Fossil 1.37 read
and write all the same repositories and sync with one another, as long
as none of the repositories contain artifacts named using SHA3.  If
a repository does contain artifacts named using SHA3, Fossil 1.37 will
not know how to interpret those artifacts and will generate various warnings
and errors.

<h2>How Fossil Decides Which Hash Algorithm To Use For New Artifacts</h2>

If newer versions of Fossil are able to use either SHA1 or SHA3 to
name artifacts, which hash algorithm is actually used?  That question
is answered by the "hash policy".  These are the supported hash policies:

<table cellpadding=10>
<tr>
<td valign='top'>sha1</td>
<td>Name all new artifacts using the (Hardened) SHA1 hash algorithm.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign='top'>auto</td>
<td>Name new artifacts using the SHA1 hash algorithm, but if any
artifacts are encountered which are already named using SHA3, then
automatically switch the hash policy to "sha3"</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign='top'>sha3</td>
<td>Name new artifacts using the SHA3 hash algorithm if the artifact
does not already have a SHA1 name.  If the artifact already has a SHA1
name, then continue to use the older SHA1 name.  Use SHA3 for new
artifacts that have never before been encountered.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign='top'>sha3-only</td>
<td>Name new artifacts using the SHA3 hash algorithm even if the artifact
already has a SHA1 name.  In other words, force the use of SHA3.  This can
cause some artifacts to be added to the repository twice, once under their
SHA1 name and again under their SHA3 name, but delta compression will
prevent that from causing repository size problems.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign='top'>shun-sha1</td>
<td>Like "sha3-only" but at this level do not accept a push of SHA1-named
artifacts.  If another Fossil instance tries to push a SHA1-named artifact,
that artifact is discarded and ignored.
</tr>
</table>

For Fossil 2.0, and obviously also for Fossil 1.37 and before, the
only hash policy supported was the one now called "sha1", meaning that
all new artifacts were named
using a SHA1 hash.
Even though Fossil 2.0 added the capability of understanding SHA3 hashes, it
never actually generates any SHA3 hashes.

From Fossil 2.1 through 2.9, the default hash policy for legacy repositories
changed to "auto", meaning that
Fossil continued to generate only SHA1 hashes until it
encountered one artifact with a SHA3 hash.  Once those older versions of
Fossil saw a single SHA3 hash, they
automatically switched to "sha3" mode and thereafter generated
only SHA3 hashes.

When a new repository is created by cloning, the hash policy is copied
from the parent.

For new repositories created using the
[/help?cmd=new|fossil new] command the default hash policy is "sha3".
That means new repositories
will normally hold nothing except SHA3 hashes.  The hash policy for new
repositories can be overridden using the "--sha1" option to the
"fossil new" command.

If you are still on Fossil 2.1 through 2.9 but you want Fossil to go
ahead and start using SHA3 hashes, change the hash policy to
"sha3" using a command like this:

<verbatim>
fossil hash-policy sha3
</verbatim>

The next check-in will use a SHA3 hash, so that when that check-in is pushed
to colleagues, their clones will include the new SHA3-named artifact, so
their local Fossil instances will automatically convert their clones to
"sha3" mode as well.

Of course, if some members of your team stubbornly refuse to upgrade past
Fossil 1.37, you should avoid changing the hash policy and creating
artifacts with SHA3 names, because once you do that your recalcitrant
coworkers will no longer be able to collaborate.

<h2>A Pure SHA3 Future</h2>

Fossil 2.10 changed the default hash policy to "sha3" mode even for
legacy repositories, so if you
upgrade to the latest version of Fossil, all of your new artifacts will
use a SHA3 hash.  Legacy SHA1 artifacts continue to use their original
names, but new artifacts will use SHA3 names. You might not even notice
this automatic change over to stronger hashes.

We decided to make the change to pure SHA3 since the last known distributor 
of Fossil 1.x binaries — Debian 9 — was finally replaced in June 2019 
by Debian 10, which included Fossil 2.8. All other known sources of 
Fossil 1.x binaries upgraded well before that point.
