<title>What People Are Saying</title>

The following are collected quotes from various forums and blogs about
Fossil, Git, and DVCSes in general.  This collection is put together
by the creator of Fossil, so of course there is selection bias...

<h2>On The Usability Of Git:</h2>

<ol>
<li>Git approaches the useability of iptables, which is to say, utterly 
unusable unless you have the manpage tattooed on you arm.

<blockquote>
<i>by mml at [http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1433387]</i>
</blockquote>

<li><nowiki>It's simplest to think of the state of your [git] repository
as a point in a high-dimensional "code-space",  in which branches are 
represented as n-dimensional membranes, mapping the spatial loci of
successive commits onto the projected manifold of each cloned
repository.</nowiki>

<blockquote>
<i>At [http://tartley.com/?p=1267]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>Git is not a Prius. Git is a Model T.
Its plumbing and wiring sticks out all over the place.
You have to be a mechanic to operate it successfully or you'll be
stuck on the side of the road when it breaks down. 
And it <b>will</b> break down.

<blockquote>
<i>Nick Farina at [http://nfarina.com/post/9868516270/git-is-simpler]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>We've been using git and github for a few months now, and it's not 
intuitive... I'm hoping someone will make a set of standard wrappers/GUI
for making git bearable.

<blockquote>
<i>maro at [http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1433387]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>I've been experimenting a lot with git at work.  
Damn, it's complicated.
It has things to trip you up with that sane people just wouldn't ever both with
including the ability to allow you to commit stuff in such a way that you can't find
it again afterwards (!!!)
Demented workflow complexity on acid?
<p>* dkf really wishes he could use fossil instead</p>
<blockquote>
<i>by Donal K. Fellow (dkf) on the Tcl/Tk chatroom, 2013-04-09.</i>
</blockquote>

<li>Klingon Code Warriors embrace Git; we enjoy arbitrary conflicts. Git is not for the weak and feeble. TODAY IS A GOOD DAY TO CODE.

<blockquote>
<i>teastain at [http://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/xpitj/10_things_i_hate_about_git/c5oj4fk]
</blockquote>


</ol>

<h2>On The Usability Of Fossil:</h2>

<ol>
<li value=7>
Fossil mesmerizes me with simplicity especially after I struggled to
get a bug-tracking system to work with mercurial.

<blockquote>
<i>rawjeev at [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/156322/what-do-people-think-of-the-fossil-dvcs]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>Fossil is awesome!!! I have never seen an app like that before, 
such simplicity and flexibility!!!

<blockquote>
<i>zengr at [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/138621/best-version-control-for-lone-developer]</i>
</blockquote>


</ol>


<h2>On Git Versus Fossil</h2>

<ol>
<li value=9>
Just want to say thanks for fossil making my life easier.... 
Also <nowiki>[for]</nowiki> not having a misanthropic command line interface.

<blockquote>
<i>Joshua Paine at [http://www.mail-archive.com/fossil-users@lists.fossil-scm.org/msg02736.html]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>We use it at a large university to manage code that small teams write.
The runs everywhere, ease of installation and portability is something that 
seems to be a good fit with the environment we have (highly ditrobuted, 
sometimes very restrictive firewalls, OSX/Win/Linux).  We are happy with it 
and teaching a Msc/Phd student (read complete novice) fossil has just 
been a smoother ride than Git was.

<blockquote>
<i>viablepanic at [http://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/bxcto/why_not_fossil_scm/]</i>
</blockquote>

<li>In the fossil community - and hence in fossil itself - development history 
is pretty much sacrosanct. The very name "fossil" was to chosen to 
reflect the unchanging nature of things in that history.

<p>In git (or rather, the git community), the development history is part of
the published aspect of the project, so it provides tools for rearranging
that history so you can present what you "should" have done rather
than what you actually did.

<blockquote>
<i>Mike Meyer on the Fossil mailing list, 2011-10-04</i>
</blockquote>
</ol>
